**Pathway to Successful Lab Information Software Implementation **

**What do we mean by “Implementation?”**

Implementation has different meaning depending on who you talk to. From the
donors perspective, they will be asking if high quality data is flowing from
facilities to national and international levels. Managers may be asking if the
software is up and running and whether or not people are using it day to day.
Ask a developer and they will likely say that software is implemented once it
has been packaged and shipped to the deployment team. The deployment team will
consider software implemented once it is installed and the Help Desk active.
Trainers may consider implementation complete once users are trained on the
software and using it in their daily work routine. For the end user, they may
say software has been implemented when they have integrated the digital tool
into their work and they are using it on a routine basis.

The purpose of this document is to outline the pathway towards successful
software implementation. While implementation intersects with software
development, the considerations outlined here does not address software
development processes and best practices.

All together, implementation consists of several activities that happen
consecutively (see Figure 1). Four major elements serve as a strong foundation
for successful implementation and lead to integrated and ongoing use of system
applications for data management. These are:

- Leadership engagement
- Deployment
- User training and coaching
- Technical support and ongoing maintenance

In order to have a successful implementation, these elements, described in
greater detail below, must be ready to roll out \_with \_the software. Not only
that, implementation goals may influence decisions about how the software is
designed and developed. The best time to do implementation planning is early on,
when the software or application is being designed.

**Leadership Engagement**

Leadership support for using digital tools is essential. In Kenya, facilities
where leadership was excited and engaged about the EMR tended to have better use
than sites where leadership was not on board or absent/not consulted prior to
and during initial implementation. When leadership at all levels are engaged and
involved in the implementation process, uptake and adoption by users improves.

Leaders and managers clearly benefit from having improved access to quality
data. However, successful and sustainable use of digital solutions mean more
than supporting staff training or encouraging the use of a tool and its data
within the workplace. Keeping patient data private and confidential translates
into taking steps to maintain data security, both physically (ie: a dedicated
server room) or electronically (i.e.: unique user logins, role-based access).
Digital tools require ongoing maintenance and, like all technology, replacement
when their performance is no longer optimal or the warranty expires. Taking
these components into consideration, preparing and supporting leadership for
implementation becomes increasingly important.

_Leadership outreach_. At the national, regional, and district levels, leaders
who are aware of digital solutions being implemented at facilities under their
supervision can be important allies. Outreach activities, such as breakfast
meetings or other one on one meetings, are opportunities to highlight how the
system or application will make decision making, reporting, and data management
easier for everyone.

\_Orientation. \_Orienting leaders to a digital tool is one way to provide them
with the information they need to support implementation, assure technical
system support when needed, and ultimately, to use the data collected by the
tool.

\_Letters of agreement. \_Letters of agreement or other documentation that lays
out the responsibilities of the national MOH (ie: HIS Unit or M&E Department),
district teams, facility leadership, service delivery or implementing partners,
donors, and I-TECH lead to improved coordination and contribute to longer term
efforts to make applications sustainable. These should include not only who is
responsible for initially purchasing different types of equipment, but who will
replace them if they malfunction or their warranty expires, who will install or
deliver the application, how ongoing maintenance will be handled, additional
duties that staff will be expected to take on, etc.

_Recognition _

**Deployment**

Much of the planning for deployment will depend on the answers to four
questions:

- What is the potential scale of the deployment?
- What deployment guidelines and procedures are currently available?
- What hardware is required in order to run the software?
- What infrastructure needs to be in place?

Depending on the robustness of the application and the availability of local
capacity to support training, deployment and ongoing maintenance, it may be
advisable to adopt a phased approach to deployment. Starting with a contained
roll out provides an opportunity to identify any unanticipated issues and
address them prior to rolling out to a larger number of sites or users as well
as build up the training and deployment capacity needed.

The answers to these questions can guide your deployment plan. This plan
identifies:

- What steps will be taken to identify sites
- How site readiness will be determined
- What hardware and networking specifications will guide procurement and
  installation
- Who will receive training by whom
- When technical support will begin

_Readiness assessment_. Not all facilities are ready to have a system or
application “go live.” Facilities where HIS digital solutions are successful
share certain characteristics, aside from engaged leadership.

_Infrastructure and procurement. _ Building from the readiness assessment, plans
can be made to address infrastructure weaknesses and procure only the supplies
needed for installation. This is another opportunity to work with facility
leadership so that they understand the infrastructure requirements (hardware,
networking, security, etc) that must be in place for successful implementation,
allowing them to take action and show their initial commitment to making the
system work in their facility.

**Training and Coaching**

_User Training and Coaching. _

User manuals and training on data collection tools tend to go from end to end of
the _application_. Most of the time, however, we expect different users to enter
or retrieve data from different parts of the application - depending on their
responsibilities within the facility. Effective user training begins by defining
what the user is expected to do with the tool during their routine work day. If
people know how to a) enter data using a number of different formats (radio
button, drop down, alphanumeric text fields) and b) know how to navigate the
application, then any additional training can focus specifically on how to use
the application to collect data pertaining to a specific _task_.

_New Release Orientation. \_If user training is done well, then refresher
training can be done in a number of different ways – a half/full day meeting
and/or one-on-one meetings if the upgrade contains significant additions to
functionality or has a significant impact on workflow, a demo or video tour of
the changes if the changes are minor (addition of a field or a new report). In
both cases, making a well-written, updated job-aid available is important._
_Different mechanisms for training include:_ \_Release notes, job aids, videos,
presentations at meetings, mentorship

**Technical Support**

The lack of a clear mechanism for getting technical support can sometimes get in
the way of uptake: users experience a problem, they try to fix it but can’t, and
the next thing you know, they are setting aside the computer or tablet to go
back to their old ways. In order to avoid this from the outset, it’s important
to make technical support available - and responsive. Most often, technical
support rests with the implementing partner or with the national MOH. Their
numbers are few and the demand, particularly in the first few weeks following
deployment, is great. Three practices can alleviate this potential problem from
the start.

During the application or program development phase, projects can take two
actions to reduce the demands on technical support:

1. Design robust features and functionality that address user needs. Sometimes,
   users complain that a system isn’t working right because they expect it to
   work differently - and more easily - than it has actually been developed.
   Taking the time to design user-friendly features will reduce this kind of
   feedback as well as the need for “just-in-time” support by making the
   application easier to use.
2. Test each software release thoroughly before deploying it to users. This
   reduces the need for on-demand support and developer fixes because
   application problems are found and addressed before roll out!

Leading up to deployment, three different practices can be put into place in
order to increase responsiveness to any issues that do arise:

1. Adopt a tiered “Help Desk” structure. The size of the deployment and facility
   will inform how many tiers and technical support staff will be needed.
   Regardless of the size of the deployment, the structure should include a
   contact point or champion at the work site or facility. This focal point does
   not need to be highly technical: they are the user’s immediate access to
   assistance. As such, they should be able to perform some basic
   troubleshooting, administrative duties (ie: manage user accounts), and
   contact more experienced technical support when an issue is more than they
   can handle. Most user issues occur at lower tiers.

   The next tier of technical support should include specialists who can handle
   any issues that are escalated from the site. They are familiar with the
   hardware, network, and system. It’s important to note that these specialists
   do not need to be programmers. Remember: any issues that require a programmer
   should dealt with before deployment, during testing. That said, technical
   support may refer issues that can only be addressed by improving
   functionality to the development team.

2. Operationalize the Help Desk by making standard operating procedures for
   reporting and resolving technical issues available.
3. Include some basic troubleshooting and Help Desk content into user training.
   This prepares users for the types of problems they may encounter, gives them
   some simple solutions to try themselves (check cables, turn the application
   or device on and then off again), and most importantly - tells them who to
   contact if the problem persists.

It’s important to recognize that the initial need for technical support will be
greater in the beginning: the application or program is new to users and they
will have more questions as they learn the ins and outs of the software. As they
become more adept, the need for support will decrease. For this reason,
scheduling 3-5 days of on-site time for technical support staff to be on hand
and weekly technical support calls to new sites is recommended.
